adr-40: use prefix store instead of multistore (#9355)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-040-storage-and-smt-state-commitments.md

2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: a reverse index to get a key from an SMT path. Recall that SMT will store `(k, v)` as `(hash(k), hash(key, value))`. So, we can get an object value by composing `SMT_path → B2 → B1`.
3. we could use more buckets to optimize the app usage if needed.

> We propose to use a KV database for both `SS` and `SC` - each run by its own database instance. This design allows for the separation of `SS` and `SC` into different hardware units, providing support for more complex setup scenarios and improving DB performance (essentially this will create two store shards: one for `SS` and another for `SC`). Moreover, we will be able to configure databases for `SS` and `SC` separately.

Reviewer: Could this behavior be configurable? i.e. it could either be one database or two databases? It seems like two db's defeats the goal of atomic commits. In a configurable scenario, someone could simply pass in two prefix stores of the same db to use one atomic db.

Reviewer 2: That's how I've implemented it - see https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/9892

Reviewer: I agree. Is there any known performance problem you're trying to address?

Author: improved performance would require multi hardware setup.

Reviewer 3: Wait isn't using a separate database, one merkelized, one not, for state been shown to be a huge efficiency improvement? Like, I thought it was the main change clients like turbogeth do? <img width="973" alt="Screenshot 2021-09-17 at 9 56 27 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6440154/133804484-7c5b1a09-8358-47ea-8f03-a39f8d288dac.png"> (Granted turbogeth's entire db

Basically all your state reads during execution don't have to do trie traversals along the merkle trie, which is guaranteed to not be cache efficient due to hashes being on every tree node. Whereas you can instead do your writes in a flat-map, and just at the end update the merkle paths in the merkelized store. You can re-use the same leaf storage for no additional data

Author: @ValarDragon  - the question is about physical DB. We are still going to use 2 different stores: `SS` and `SC` (which is the main source of optimization).

Author: @aaronc if we will split DB into 2 hardware units, then we will have another performance boost. However, you are right - it will not make the atomic updates.

Author: During the call we are deciding to design the software to work with 2 DB instances as well as a single one.

> We propose to use a KV database for both `SS` and `SC` - each run by its own database instance. This design allows for the separation of `SS` and `SC` into different hardware units, providing support for more complex setup scenarios and improving DB performance (essentially this will create two store shards: one for `SS` and another for `SC`). Moreover, we will be able to configure databases for `SS` and `SC` separately.

Author: done

Below, with simple _snapshot_ we refer to a database snapshot mechanism, not to a _ABCI snapshot sync_. The latter will be referred as _snapshot sync_ (which will directly use DB snapshot as described below).

> Database snapshot is a view of DB state at a certain time or transaction. It's not a full copy of a database (it would be too big). Usually a snapshot mechanism is based on a _copy on write_ and it allows to efficiently deliver DB state at a certain stage.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Database snapshot is a view of DB state at a certain time or transaction. It's not a full copy of a database (it would be too big). Usually a snapshot mechanism is based on a _copy on write_ and it allows DB state to be efficiently delivered at a certain stage.
```

NOTE: `Commit` must be called exactly once per block. Otherwise we risk going out of sync for the version number and block height.
NOTE: For the SDK storage, we may consider splitting that interface into `Committer` and `PruningCommitter` - only the multiroot should implement `PruningCommitter` (cache and prefix store don't need pruning).

Number of historical versions for `abci.RequestQuery` and state sync snapshots is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration (configuration implied by the blockchain consensus). A configuration should allow to specify number of past blocks and number of past blocks modulo some number (eg: 100 past blocks and one snapshot every 100 blocks for past 2000 blocks). Archival nodes can keep all past versions.

> Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT won't update nodes - instead it creates new nodes on the update path, without removing the old one. Since we are snapshoting each block, we need to change that mechanism to immediately remove orphaned nodes from the database. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records and make it available when accessing past versions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT won't update nodes - instead it creates new nodes on the update path, without removing the old one. Since we are snapshotting each block, we need to change that mechanism to immediately remove orphaned nodes from the database. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records and make it available when accessing past versions.
```

> Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT won't update nodes - instead it creates new nodes on the update path, without removing the old one. Since we are snapshotting each block, we need to change that mechanism to immediately remove orphaned nodes from the database. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records and make it available when accessing past versions.

Reviewer 5: What is the performance implication of this?

Author: We are using underlying, optimized DB mechanism for managing versions and not pruning manually. We don't have a good solution for pruning, so we don't have a good baseline. The only baseline we have is the current IAVL implementation. We were benchmarking creating snapshots. But we can also benchmark snapshot removal.

Another consequences:
+ version management is effectively shifted down to the DB
+ we take an advantage of the huge community using the underlying DB and more contributors looking into it.
+ less code and problems to maintain.

Author: If you think we should further discuss it then I will add a TODO in the ADR  - this is not related to this PR.

> To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove DB snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height and calling a store function to remove past versions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To manage the active snapshots we will either use a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or we will remove DB snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height and calling a store function to remove past versions.
```

#### Accessing old state versions

One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.RequestQuery` structure.  The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.RequestQuery` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.
`abci.RequestQuery` doesn't need old state of `SC` unless the `prove=true` parameter is set. The SMT merkle proof must be included in the `abci.ResponseQuery` only if both `SC` and `SS` have a snapshot for requested version.

> Moreover, SDK could provide a way to directly access a historical state. However, a state machine shouldn't do that - since the number of snapshots is configurable, it would lead to nondeterministic execution.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Moreover, the SDK could provide a way to directly access a historical state. However, a state machine shouldn't do that - since the number of snapshots is configurable, it would lead to nondeterministic execution.
```

```
type KVStore interface {
    ... current KVStore

    WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore
}
```

The `WithPrefix` method will create a proxy object for the parent object and will prepend `prefix` to a key parameter of all key-value operations (similar to the `store/prefix.Store` implementation).
The following invariant should be applied

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]
    store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(prefix + key)
```

#### Optimization: use compression for prefix keys

Moreover we can consider a compression of prefix keys using Huffman Coding. It will require a knowledge of used prefixes. And for best results it will need an frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding the above invariant should have the following shape:

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]
    store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(store.Code(prefix) + key)
```

Where `store.Code(prefix)` is a Huffman Code of `prefix` in the given `store`.

> 

Author: @aaronc originally suggested to map a module "verbose" key to a 2 byte sequence prefix for key prefix compression, eg:
```
bank -> 0x0001
staking -> 0x0002
....
```
In both mechanisms we will need to assure that the created map will be stable (we will always construct the same mapping pairs).

NOTE: Both Huffman Codes and module key map compress the keys only for the `SS`. It's not needed for `SC` because in `SC` we always operate on a hash of a key.

Author: I think the Aaron is easier to manage. The limitation is that we bound the number of modules to 65536 (2^16) -  which is big enough to worry about now.

Reviewer: To make this prefix model work effectively, I think there should be some stateful prefix map - possibly stored under some special restricted schema prefix (probably `0`) on the `RootStore`. We can use varint encoding and not require a restriction to 2 bytes, but also 2 bytes is probably fine.

In this restricted schema key-space, we would have a mapping from `key name` -> `compressed prefix`, which is itself prefixed to allow for other schema use cases.

How does that sound?

Reviewer 5: How important is it to have this optimization at all?

Reviewer: String prefixes could potentially be rather long (maybe full proto msg names eventually as discussed in #9156). I think it's relatively important.

Author: If we want to enable variable prefix length, then huffman coding is better, because it takes frequency into account and it is also protects against common prefixes.

We identified use-cases, where modules will need to save an object commitment without storing an object itself. Sometimes clients are receiving complex objects, and they have no way to prove a correctness of that object without knowing the storage layout. For those use cases it would be easier to commit to the object without storing it directly.

### Remove MultiStore

> IAVL based store adds additional layer in the SDK store construction - the `MultiStore` structure. The multi store exists to support the modularity of the Cosmos SDK - each module is using it's own instance of IAVL, but in the current implementation, all instances share the same database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
IAVL based store adds an additional layer in the SDK store construction - the `MultiStore` structure. The multistore exists to support the modularity of the Cosmos SDK - each module is using its own instance of IAVL, but in the current implementation, all instances share the same database.
```

> The latter indicates, however, that the implementation doesn't provide true modularity. Instead it causes problems related to race condition and sync problems (eg: [\#6370](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/6370)).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

The latter indicates, however, that the implementation doesn't provide true modularity. Instead it causes problems related to race condition and sync problems (eg: [\#6370](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/6370)).
```

> We propose to remove the MultiStore concept from the SDK, and use a single instance of `SC` and `SS` in a `rootStore` object. To avoid confusions, we should rename `MultiStore` interface to `RootStore` interface and make sure that the `rootStore` object will implement it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We propose to remove the multistore concept from the SDK, and to use a single instance of `SC` and `SS` in a `rootStore` object. To avoid confusion, we should rename the `MultiStore` interface to `RootStore` and make sure that the `rootStore` object implements `RootStore`.
```

> We propose to remove the multistore concept from the SDK, and to use a single instance of `SC` and `SS` in a `rootStore` object. To avoid confusion, we should rename the `MultiStore` interface to `RootStore` and make sure that the `rootStore` object implements `RootStore`.

Reviewer 5: ACK. But why mention `RootMultiStore` in the above changes then?

Author: Old version. I will update.

Moreover, to improve usability, we should extend the `KVStore` interface with _prefix store_. This will allow module developers to bind a store to a namespace for module sub-components:

> ```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```go
```

type KVStore interface {
    ... current KVStore

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Reviewer 2: I agree, mentioned this above https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/9355#issuecomment-874502492

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Reviewer 5: It makes sense for this API to exist on the `RootStore` as that is how I imagine module's will request access to a prefixed store. That abstraction makes sense to me.

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Reviewer: If this `WithPrefix` method just takes a string and compresses it, it shouldn't be used by modules for prefix stores

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Reviewer: Then again maybe that's something we do want modules to have to manage key prefixes 🤔

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Author: I think it makes sense to have it in `KVStore` - this way we can encapsulate context and implement optimization inside.

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Author: In SDK, modules usually have _key families_ - objects with a common prefix. For  example, in `x/bank` we have: supply, DenomMetadata, DenomAddress, Balances. In one of the architecture updates to the module we want that the module will receive it's own store. In x/bank, today we have:
```
ctx.KVStore(storeKey)  // where storeKey = "bank"
```
This doesn't follow OCAPS, because in x/bank I coud do `ctx.KVStore("gov")`. Instead we want:
```
bankStore := ctx.KVStore(goCtx)
// or
bankStore := accessor.KVStore(goCtx)
```
Then I can write:
```
balanceStore := bankStore.WithPrefix("BalancesPrefix")
```
and us it in some DAL responsible for balance management.

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Author: If `WithPrefix` is confusing then we can rename it to `Substore` or `Subnamespace`.

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Reviewer 2: But what advantage does this have over:
`balanceStore := PrefixStore(bankStore, "BalancesPrefix")`

What kind of optimization would warrant adding this to the KVStore interface?

>     WithPrefix(prefix string) KVStore

Author: @roysc , you are right, `PrefixStore` function is better than extending the interface.

}
```

The `WithPrefix` method will create a proxy object for the parent object and will prepend `prefix` to a key parameter of all key-value operations (similar to the `store/prefix.Store` implementation).
The following invariant should be applied

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]
    store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(prefix + key)
```

### Optimization: compress module keys

> We can consider a compression of prefix keys using Huffman Coding. It will require a knowledge of used prefixes (module store keys) a priori. And for best results it will need an frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding the above invariant should have the following form:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We can consider a compression of prefix keys using Huffman Coding. It will require a knowledge of used prefixes (module store keys) a priori. And for best results it will need frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding, the above invariant should have the following form:
```

> We can consider a compression of prefix keys using Huffman Coding. It will require a knowledge of used prefixes (module store keys) a priori. And for best results it will need frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding, the above invariant should have the following form:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We can consider a compression of prefix keys using [Huffman Coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huffman_coding). It will require knowledge of used prefixes (module store keys) a priori. And for best results, it will need frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding, the above invariant should have the following form:
```

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]
    store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(store.Code(prefix) + key)
```

Where `store.Code(prefix)` is a Huffman Code of `prefix` in the given `store`.

To avoid conflicts in the address space, we need to assure that in the set of prefix codes, there are not two elements where one is a prefix of another:

```
for each k1, k2 \in {store.Code(p): p \in StoreModuleKeys}
    assert( !k1.hasPrefix(k2) )
```

> NOTE: We need to assure that the codes won't change. Huffman Coding depends on the keys and it's frequencies - so we would need to generate the codes and then fix the mapping in a static variable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NOTE: We need to assure that the codes won't change. Huffman Coding depends on the keys and its frequency - so we would need to generate the codes and then fix the mapping in a static variable.
```

#### Merkle Proofs and IBC

Currently IBC (v1.0) module merkle proof for a `(key, value)` consists of two elements `[storeKey, proof]`. Verification using 2 passes:
1. Checks that a `proof` is a valid merkle proof `(key, value)` using ICS-23 spec.
2. Then it checks that the `storeKey` and `root(proof)` hashes to the AppHash (App state commitment).

Breaking this behavior would severely impact the Cosmos ecosystem which already widely adopts the IBC module. Unfortunately, the straightforward implementation is breaking because all keys in `SC` are hashed. So we can't simply make the last step. Even if we set the `storeKey` to an empty string it will rehash.

For workaround we need to:
+ keep the double hashing and multistore concept for IBC.
+ the `RootStore` will have only two stores: the general one, and another for IBC. `RootStore` should not expose mounting stores in a "runtime" (it's only possible to do it through constructor).
+ The App Hash is a hash of both stores in the `RootStore`.

### Optimization: compress module keys

> We consider a compression of prefix keys using [Huffman Coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huffman_coding). It will require knowledge of used prefixes (module store keys) a priori. And for best results, it will need frequency information for each prefix (how often objects are stored in the store under the same prefix key). With Huffman Coding, the `WithPrefix` invariant has the following form:

Author: Longer keys (in SS) is one of the negative consequences of the ADR-40. So I think it's good to mention something. We don't need to have a final solution now. Maybe that will require another ADR or we will update this one.

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]

>     store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(store.Code(prefix) + key)

Author: Right, `store.Set(...)` doesn't know if it should uses a compression or not.
So, to avoid confusions we should enable the compression only on the "first" level (when doing `ctx.KVStore`). I will update the paragraph.

}
```

The `WithPrefix` method will create a proxy object for the parent object and will prepend `prefix` to a key parameter of all key-value operations (similar to the `store/prefix.Store` implementation).
The following invariant must hold:

```
for each OP in [Get Has, Set, ...]
    store.WithPrefix(prefix).OP(key) == store.OP(prefix + key)
```

The `RootStore` will have the following interface:

```
TODO
```

In contrast to `MultiStore`, `RootStore` doesn't allow to mount dynamically sub stores. However it can inherit a multistore functionality in it's concrete implementation (which will be needed for IBC support).

#### Merkle Proofs and IBC

Currently IBC (v1.0) module merkle proof for a `(key, value)` consists of two elements `[storeKey, proof]`. Verification using 2 passes:
1. Checks that a `proof` is a valid merkle proof `(key, value)` using ICS-23 spec.
2. Then it checks that the `storeKey` and `root(proof)` hashes to the AppHash (App state commitment).

Breaking this behavior would severely impact the Cosmos ecosystem which already widely adopts the IBC module. Unfortunately, the straightforward implementation is breaking. Hence, we

> , it then verifies proof store key hashes to app_hash with simple merkle tree verification method.

Reviewer 5: This sentence doesn't make any sense. Mind looking over it again?

+ Decoupling state from state commitment introduce better engineering opportunities for further optimizations and better storage patterns.
+ Performance improvements.
+ Joining SMT based camp which has wider and proven adoption than IAVL. Example projects which decided on SMT: Ethereum2, Diem (Libra), Trillan, Tezos, LazyLedger.

> + Multistore removal fixes a long standing issues with current MultiStore design.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
+ Multistore removal fixes a longstanding issue with the current MultiStore design.
```

Reviewer 4: It might also be nice to be more specific as to what the longstanding issue is here.

Author: added complexity with no benefits.
